---
title: "Five barriers"
date: 2025-03-25
tags: english
---

What stops you from acting on climate change? You might perhaps say that you don't like how some activists have acted, or you don't know who to trust with so much information going around. It's true that it's challenging to navigate in today's world. The Norwegian psychologist Per Espen Stoknes defined five "barriers" that prevent a person from hearing and acting on the climate message. These are: 

1. Distance. Do you feel like it's a problem that concerns others, far away?
2. Doom. Do you feel so much helplessness when you think about global warming that you just move away?
3. Dissonance. Is it unconfortable to consider your actions don't match what you know?
4. Denial. Does it feel better to find ways to discredit or mock those who tell you about climate change?
5. Identity. Is climate action not accepted by "your group", maybe your poilitical affiliation, religions grouping, or just professional identity?

For each of these, I'd like to offer some words of encouragement, because I've felt them all too.

1. Remember that everything is connected in very real ways. When we talk about something so global like climate change, you can find things you care about that are affected almost everywhere. For example, how would you feel about coffee prices doubling in the coming years? Doubling again after that? Or how does it feel if your children won't get to experience snowy winters like you did?
2. Remember that every fraction of a degree or warming matters. I find hope in the fact that, even if we've waited too long to act already, our actions right now can still be prevent the worst outcomes in the future - but then we have to act now.
3. Remember that perfect is the enemy of the good. Don't beat yourself or others up about not being perfect, instead, focus on one thing that you can improve, and accept that you won't be able to change everything today. 
4. We naturally seek out messages that confirm our worldview. Remember to practice curiosity - even if you disagree, can you give someone else the benefit of the doubt? Try to separate the message from the messenger. You are entitled to dislike the actions or even hairstyles of climate activists, but disregarding what they're saying for so shallow reasons might simply not be in your own best interest.
5. Maybe identity is the scariest to think about, because if I don't think or act in accordance with my group, they might shun me, and that might be my biggest fear. Remember that your group is probably also full of various, curious, questionining people. Try to seek out someone who's willing to be curious too, and it might be easier together.

I hope this helps you evaluate things honestly and in line with your values. Of course I would say your help is needed to stop climate change, but I also know you need to come to your own conclusions. Oh, and just so it's clear, the "climate message" is:

*The world is warming, and this is caused by human activity. This warming will have catastrophic consequences which we are already starting to taste. We have the power to avoid the worst outcomes, but only if we mobilize quickly and globally to reduce carbon emissions.*

Which barriers did you feel triggered when you read that? 
